Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane. British-born author James P. Hogan has gained
a reputation as one of the premier writers of hard science fiction working today.
He's published seven novels so far including Inherit the Stars, The Gentle
Giants of Ganymede, Giant Star, Thrice Upon a Time, The Two Faces of Tomorrow,
and his latest Voyage from Yesteryear. Hogan tells us how he became an author.
When I left school at uh when I was 16 and wanted to be a writer then. I guess
it was you know something that I always enjoyed doing as a kid at school. You
know the essays and the story writing exercises you get. And uh when I left
school I told the world I was going to be a writer, and it seemed a good idea
until somebody said well with all the accumulated wisdom and experience of 16
years what are you going to write about that the world is breathlessly waiting
to hear? And uh I hadn't thought about that, and the answer was not a lot. So I
went away into engineering and electronics and computers and things like that
for something like 20 years. And I suppose the the the interest in in writing
probably never went away. For 20 years, Hogan worked as a systems designer for
computers and sold computers to scientists for use in their research. Associating
with scientists as he did, Hogan was exposed to all sorts of current scientific
research, and he would make use of his scientific contacts when he began to write
seriously. I made use of my customers pretty freely as consultants um which was
kind of handy, but I found that I had customers who were brain surgeons and other
customers who were studying pieces of rock brought back from the Apollo missions,
and um other guys who were building in you know or investigating machine
intelligence. Just about any of the topics or the the favorite themes of
science fiction that you could pick out of a hat. The chances were sort
of not 10 to 1. I had a customer specializing in that field and I just had to, if
I needed some background information on a particular, topic, I could almost
guarantee I had a phone number in my diary of a guy who could talk all day about
it and uh they love doing it as well. I used to call them and uh if they'd like
to come and talk to you tomorrow uh well we're a little busy but what's it about?
Oh uh I need some help with the book I'm working on well why didn't you say so?
What time do you want to show up? And they talk all day. And I think this is
one of the uh interesting sides of selling computers into this kind of area. You
can imagine some of these specialists specialists they talk to bacteria all day
long or whatever and they end up shut in the back rooms of universities and
maybe there are four people on the planet they can talk to who understand their
language and uh sometimes they find it hard to believe that somebody from the
the world outside that has walked in off the street is sincerely interested to
sit down and talk to them and he's curious he wants to know what they're doing,
he wants to have it explained. So writing about his experiences with scientists
Hogan found that he was a science fiction writer. I didn't particularly set out
to be a science fiction writer. I suppose I became one by accident I just always
wanted to write and started writing stories about the little bit of life that
I'd had some personal experience of and was told I was a science fiction writer
and I said how's that? They said well the publisher is publishing it under their
science fiction imprint so we guess you have to be. So I said okay. And it kind of
started out like that. Hogan's books are scientifically accurate and highly
realistic. He's been called the man who put science back into science fiction
next time we'll talk to James P. Hogan about some of his novels.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Radio Show, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction
and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And David Carson. James P. Hogan's 1977 science fiction
novel, Inherit the Stars, should be required reading for anyone who demands
scientific accuracy in an exciting narrative. The book takes place some 50 years
in the future. A skeleton inside a space suit is found on the moon. That's
interesting enough, but what follows is even more provocative. The skeleton is a
human one, and it's been on the moon for 50,000 years. The scientific unraveling
of this mystery forms the basis of the novel. It's like a detective story, and
Hogan talks about the origins of the idea. 2001 was one of the factors that
inspired me to write Inherit the Stars. I love the idea of something being
found, a mystery being uncovered in the course of lunar exploration that was
sufficiently intriguing to motivate a lot of scientists into unraveling it. It
seemed a good opportunity to set the scientific detective story that I wanted to
write. You know, okay, let's have the detective story, or the mystery that the
detectives are trying to solve, hinge around something that's turned up on the
moon. Well, dead bodies are always pretty good for detective stories. It ought
to be a more interesting dead body than the standard detective thriller, so
let's make it 50,000 years old and human, which raises the whole, opens up the
whole bag of worms. And let's just see how they unravel that. And I wanted the
ending to be a
bit of a twist, a bit of a surprise, but nevertheless plausible and rational
within the context of the story. I didn't want to bring in mystical agencies or
strange
laws of physics or anything like this to hold it together. The entire scientific
community of Earth starts to work on the baffling problem of the space-suited 50
,000-year-old human skeleton, which they named Charlie. They soon find remnants
on the moon of Charlie's culture, a map of an unfamiliar planet, scraps of
Charlie's diary in an unfamiliar language, and some technological artifacts.
With such clues, the scientists begin to piece together the incredible story of
who Charlie was and why he was human. Hogan says the book sort of defines what
science is all about. It counters some of the distorted images of scientists
Hogan has seen in fiction. Scientists were always eccentric and they wore odd
-colored shoes and they drew cabbages that ate people and they wanted to conquer
the world or something. And there were these cute public impressions of
scientists of people who run down the street with no clothes on shouting Eureka.
You read phrases like it came to him in a flash and you read on and what came to
him in a flash would have been enough to keep Einstein busy for the next 20
years. And real science, you know, there are insights, there are strokes of
genius, but the overwhelming bulk of the work is done by a lot of unsung heroes,
a lot of people doing nothing really dramatic or exciting, but just meticulously
sifting through details and collecting information for generations and for
centuries, all different parts of the world. And it's really like putting
together a huge jigsaw puzzle, lots of people cutting out pieces and twisting
them around. Every now and again, somebody will take a huge chunk in this corner
and see that it fits with a huge chunk down there and that's a breakthrough. And
so it goes on. And it really is a detective story. I think it's a far more
exciting one than most detective fiction. We strongly recommend you read Inherit
the Stars to find out the solution to the mystery surrounding Charlie. Hogan
wrote two sequels to Inherit the Stars, and all three form a trilogy that
presents an awesome view of man's origins. Next time, we'll talk with Hogan
about those other two books.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. James P. Hogan's science fiction novel,
Inherit the Stars, was popular enough with readers to justify a sequel. Two of
them, in fact. The first was entitled The Gentle Giants of Ganymede, and it was
published in 1978. Hogan explains why he wrote the book. When I wrote Inherit
the Stars, I had three books in mind. I had a trilogy in mind. So I put the
hooks in... Although Inherit the Stars was a complete story in itself, you know,
it didn't leave anything... It didn't leave the reader hanging. It told and...
It started and told and finished a story. Nevertheless, there were a couple of
hooks in there that invited some questions, which sort of, as it were, paved the
way to a follow-up book. And my thinking at the time was, I'll go that far, but
I won't write the second book until I have some feedback as to how the readers
liked the first one. And I got a lot of mail, and they all liked it. And a lot
of them said in their letters, will there be a follow-up? They picked out the
hooks. So I wrote The Gentle Giants. The Gentle Giants, of the title, are a race
of aliens that first turned up and inherit the stars. In that book, scientists
from Earth had discovered a wrecked spaceship on Ganymede, one of Jupiter's huge
moons. And on it were the remains of prehistoric creatures from Earth, dinosaurs
and the like. In The Gentle Giants of Ganymede, humans meet some live
Ganymedeans who have returned to the solar system after a mishap in space kept
them away for some 25 million years due to time dilation. It turns out that the
Ganymedeans had been responsible for human evolution. They'd taken primitive
hominids from Earth 25 million years ago and moved them to a planet called
Minerva. Minerva was then one of the inner planets of our solar system, but it
was destroyed in a tremendous war involving the human stock that had evolved
from the Ganymedean experiments. The second book ends with the Ganymedeans
leaving the solar system in search of their own people, who migrated from
Minerva millions of years before the war that destroyed the planet. Hogan says
readers wanted a third book. And they wanted another one, and I did have a
trilogy in mind when I wrote it, and the third one in that series is now
written. It's called Giant Star, and it will be, it's a July title, so it should
start to appear in the bookstores around June. It's the third and last. There
won't be any more in that series. So it ties up a few of the loose ends, tells
another story,
continues with the characters we met in the previous two books, both the
terrestrial and the alien characters, and introduces some new ones. And I don't
think there can be a fourth one, because it really, I don't think there's any
more to be said. It wraps it all up.
Giant Star was published in 1981, and as Hogan said, it wraps up all the
mysteries and loose ends raised in the first two books. And it presents an
absolutely breathtaking concept of man's origins, explaining also where man gets
his curious nature, his aggressiveness, and his incredible instinct for
survival. Hogan talks about the underlying purpose of the whole trilogy.
Basically, it was an attempt to depict science as it is, or at least as I
perceive it. And at the same time, weave that into a story that people who were
non-scientists, non-specialists, would find stimulating and arousing for the
curiosity, even if, you know, without trying to turn it into a 250-page lab
report or something like that. And stimulating, the books certainly are. For
sheer grandeur, the whole Minervan trilogy, as some have called it, is matched
by a few other works in the field of science fiction. Isaac Asimov's Foundation
trilogy comes to mind as a comparison, as does Olaf Stapleton's Odd John. James
B. Hogan's Inherit the Stars, The Gentle Giants of Ganymede, and Giant Star.
Contemporary science fiction has little to offer that's any better.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane, and David Carson. Time travel is one of the traditional
themes of science fiction. One of the best, certainly one of the most realistic
time travel books, is James Hogan's Thrice Upon a Time, which came out in 1980.
But for some time, for a number of years, in fact, before I wrote Thrice Upon a
Time, I'd been wanting to write a time travel book for a number of reasons.
Firstly, I wanted to attempt to face up to the paradoxes, the logical paradoxes,
once and for all, and answer them without cop-outs, without convenient
coincidences, and without obliging characters who just happened to do the right
thing to make everything come out the way the author said.
And secondly, I wanted to get away from this kind of cliche of some kind of a
conjurer's box, described or disguised as whatever, that you jump into and you
jump out of and you're in some other time. We've seen too many conjurer's boxes,
and it seemed to me unrealistic. If I ever build a box like that, and I thought
it was going to take me to another time, I certainly wouldn't jump into it and
press the button. I would conduct a long series of tests and experiments first,
and none of our heroes ever seem to do this. Hogan wanted to avoid some of the
clichés or formulas that characterized most time travel stories. I think in too
many stories, time machines are used like starships. They're just a device, a
vehicle, to get some characters into an unusual environment, and then tell a
pretty routine story that was stolen from Greek mythology or European medieval
history. And the technology doesn't come into the story at all. They could have
gone there on a Greyhound bus. I didn't want to do that. And so the story was
about some physicists who had stumbled upon this phenomenon and had realized
that if what they were seeing meant what they thought it meant, it meant that
they could actually inject information into the past and change the past, with
all the questions that implies.
The strange thing the physicists learn is that they can send messages into the
past, not far into the past, maybe just ten minutes. I didn't want it to be a
million years or a billion years or some huge span of time where really nothing
that you did could make any difference. How about a lab bench experiment? Ten
minutes. You can just send a little signal back to yourself ten minutes ago and
change what you've already done. This is interesting. You're hard up against the
paradoxes now. You can't find a way around them or duck them. You've got to
answer the question, what happens? The logic of it, the whole situation becomes
absolutely, it drives you to the point of insanity trying to figure it out. It
was the logic and the science implied by the time travel theme that fascinated
Hogan. He wanted to approach the concept realistically. And it's so realistic
that you feel, after reading the book, you could go down to Radio Shack and buy
the parts to make a time travel machine. Recently, a number of responsible
scientists have been speculating on the actual possibility of time travel. We
asked Hogan if he thought it would ever be a reality and if his book was meant
to be prophetic. Well, I don't know whether it's prophetic or not. Well, as is
elaborated in the book itself, if something like that ever became a fact, there
are some pretty interesting problems that are going to have to be solved. And
our ideas of logic and cause and effect are going to have to undergo some pretty
interesting revisions. So, I'm certainly not setting myself up as a prophet and
saying, yes, it'll happen. Maybe, I don't know. I think history has shown that
impossible or it'll never happen are very dangerous phrases to use in any
context. More with James P. Hogan next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Of all science fiction writers working
today, no one surpasses James P. Hogan in scientific accuracy and realism.
Hogan's publisher, Ballantine Books, has advertised them as the man who put
science back in science fiction. And after reading books like Thrice Upon a Time
and The Two Faces of Tomorrow, you realize how much he deserves that
description. Hogan is also concerned with realism, with the kind of everyday
detail that makes a story, even though it's set in the future, a totally
believable one. He explains why realistic detail is important. I think these
kinds of details do matter because if we're putting a story into a futuristic
setting, I think the little details of background, such as if the guy needs to
make a phone tour, how does he go about it if he needs to rent a cab, these
matter because if the story is being told in the future, the whole of the
background has to be consistently futuristic. I've come across a number of
instances which, in my opinion, are a little flawed because it's spelt with an
AW. A writer may have seized on a particular thought, maybe a new scientific
idea or a machine or whatever, develops that very well, but kind of gets hung up
on it and in the background, everything else that's going on hasn't changed
since 1980.
And trying to, I think, just stop typing for the five minutes it takes just to
think about a situation. The guy's going to make a phone call, just like stop
and think how he might make that and think about it for five minutes and then
maybe show it in a way different to what would have been the impulsive thing to
do in the first couple of seconds.
Hogan says that his readers appreciate his attention to realistic detail and
accuracy. In fact, he thinks he attracts some readers who don't normally read
science fiction because of it. From the people who write to me and the people
that I meet, one of the gratifying things I observe in the readership that I
have is that it is not confined to what might be termed the hardcore science
fiction reader who buys anything new that appears on the science fiction section
of the bookstores. But a lot of, I suppose, people who might be termed younger
professional people in their late 20s, 30s, 40s, in all manner of professions,
not necessarily to do with the sciences, teachers, lawyers, doctors, so forth,
who typically would say, gee, I used to read science fiction when I was at
college or when I was at university, but I kind of grew out of it. And I can't
relate to way out galaxies like years away anymore or aliens running around with
ray guns. Today I have a family, a career, a mortgage, my feet are solidly on
the surface of this planet. But they seem to like stories that don't kind of try
and take them to the other side of the universe a million years from now, but
maybe just stretch the future 20 or 30 years. And they find names in the book
like IBM and Avis and Boeing. In familiar places. And it kind of grabs them. I
say, well, you know, this I can relate to. It's the world that I live in just
stretched a little bit. The connection is not broken. The economics and the
politics have evolved from what I read in the papers. I can still see the
connections. And it could be the world my kids grow up in. And I like it.
Hogan's latest novel, Voyage from Yesteryear, is further in the future than his
other books. And the field of action is much broader. But it's typically Hogan
in his credibility. If you haven't been exposed to James P. Hogan's brand of
science fiction, you're missing something.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.